# NextBrain utils

NextBrain is a probabilistic atlas of the entire human brain derived
from histology images.

> Casamitjana, A., Mancini, M., Robinson, E., Peter, L. et al.
> A probabilistic histological atlas of the human brain for MRI segmentation.
> Nature (2025).
> https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09708-2

It can be used by an accompanying software to segment any brain scan into
more than 300 anatomical regions at sub-millimeter resolution.

> Puonti, O., Nolan, J., Dicamillo, R., Balbastre, Y., et al.
> Fast segmentation with the NextBrain histological atlas.
> bioRxiv (2025).
> https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.22.673638

The NextBrain subcortical labels follow the Allen Brain ontology.
The Allen Human Brain Atlas is a reference anatomical atlas of the human
brain drawn on a single specimen.

> Ding, S.-L., Royall, J.J., Sunkin, S.M., Ng, L. et al.
> Comprehensive cellular-resolution atlas of the adult human brain.
> The Journal of Comparative Neurology (2016).
> https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.24080

The tools provided in this package allow NextBrain label maps to be
converted to Allen Brain label maps. It also allows Allen Brain label
maps to be simplified by collapsing labels along levels of its ontology.

## Examples

#### Combine both NextBrain hemispheres into a single file

```shell
nextbrain-utils combine \
    -l seg.left.nii.gz \
    -r seg.right.nii.gz \
    -o seg.both.nii.gz \
    -m sides.nii.gz
```

#### Convert NextBrain labels to Allen labels

```shell
nextbrain-utils allen \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.allen.nii.gz
```

Note that some of the Allen Brain labels are pretty large and cannot
be encoded in a 16 bit integer. This means that Freeview does not properly
display them, even if an appropriate lookup table is used. As a workaround,
"large" Allen labels can be mapped to a lower range. Specifically, we

- map the range [146035001, 146035199] to [1, 199]
- map the range [146034600, 146034999] to [600, 999]
- map the range [266441000, 266441999] to [3000, 3999]
- map the range [267499000, 267499999] to [9000, 9999]

```shell
nextbrain-utils allen \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.allen.nii.gz \
    -s16
```

By default, this function approximately maps the Desikan-Killiany cortical
labels generated by Freesurfer/NextBrain to Allen's gyral labels. This
mapping is imperfect and cannot be totally trusted. It is possible to
preserve the Desikan-Killiany labels (IDs in range [1000, 2999]).

```shell
nextbrain-utils allen \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.allen.nii.gz \
    -c dk
```

Alternatively, the Desikan-Killiany labels can be preserved, or
collapsed into coarsed "developmental" cortical regions.

```shell
nextbrain-utils allen \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.allen.nii.gz \
    -c dev
```

#### Simplify an Allen segmentation map

```shell
nextbrain-utils simplify \
    -i seg.allen.nii.gz \
    -o seg.simple.nii.gz \
    -l AMY ATA EXA Ca Pu NAC GP Cla BF THM SubTH HTH HIP
```

The list of labels to collapse can be long names, acronyms or IDs from
the Allen ontology. If the Allen map uses S16-compatible labels, please
use the `-s16` option here as well.

Then Allen ontology can br browsed online:

* [Allen ontology, Developmental/Brodmann labels](https://atlas.brain-map.org/atlas?atlas=265297126#atlas=265297126&structure=10390)
* [Allen ontology, Gyral labels](https://atlas.brain-map.org/atlas?atlas=138322605#atlas=138322605&structure=10390)

#### Convert NextBrain labels to ASeg+AParc labels

```shell
nextbrain-utils aseg \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.aseg.aparc.nii.gz \
    -s sides.nii.gz
```

#### Convert NextBrain labels to SuperSynth labels

```shell
nextbrain-utils supersynth \
    -i seg.both.nii.gz \
    -o seg.supersynth.nii.gz\
    -s sides.nii.gz
```

#### Generate an Allen lookup table compatible with Freesurfer

```shell
nextbrain-utils lut \
    -o AllenBrainLUT.txt \
    -l allen+dk
```

By default, this lookup table uses long names for each region.
Acronyms can be used instead.

```shell
nextbrain-utils lut \
    -o AllenBrainLUT.txt \
    -l allen+dk \
    -a
```

If S16-compatible labels are used, use the `-s16` option here as well.

```shell
nextbrain-utils lut \
    -o AllenBrainLUT.txt \
    -l allen+dk \
    -s16
```

The ASeg and SuperSynth label maps can be displayed using the default
freesurfer lookup table. Nonetheless, compact lookup tables that only
contain labels present in a ASeg+AParc or SuperSynth label map can be
generated. Possible LUT options are

- `allen` : Labels from the Allen Brain developmental ontology
- `allen+dk` : Allen + append Desikan-Killiany cortical labels
- `nextbrain` : NextBrain
- `aseg` : ASeg+AParc/SynthSeg
- `supersynth` : SuperSynth
- `supersynth-cerebrum` : SuperSynth (cerebrum mode)
- `supersynth-exvivo` : SuperSynth (exvivo mode)
- `freesurfer` : Complete FreeSurfer colormap
